In recent years, the wealth of data available over the internet has given birth to new approaches to intellectual history - ones not reliant on curation by academia, but by the public (or at least those with access to the digital domain). As with all things on the internet, it can be gathered programmatically, offering opportunities to build new metrics for concepts previously considered unquantifiable. In question here: can we map the influence of a movement on contemporary culture? In doing so, can we measure the spread of said concept? And what do the contemporary interpretations tell us about how the original idea’s shape has transformed?

We attempt to answer these questions using Wikipedia’s link structure as a data source. This underlying set of interconnections allows us to gauge the cognitive proximity of concepts, and thereby the influence of one upon another, without the limitations of geographic or chronologic distance, as determined by the community of amateur researchers powering Wikipedia. In building a model, we establish a single case study to act as the central node for our influence-network: the art movement Dada.

### “Why Dada?”

Cultural influence, while not currently quantified as a metric, is actively tracked through a multitude of historic and philosophical studies: art history, cultural history, intellectual history, “The History of Thought” and even Memetics (although the persistence of this last discipline is debatable).

In embarking on building a metric for cultural influence, quantifiable through link structures, Dada is chosen because it is well documented through it’s own publications and the analyses of the aforementioned disciplines. Dada also enjoys the distinct strength of prominence in academia whilst generally falling outside the curriculums of mainstream culture, meaning it is less likely to suffer from over-representation in Wikipedia, as is often found with pop culture and art topics (Kittur et al, 2009; Halvais and Lackaff, 2009).

Further, ongoing debate on Dada as a modernist or postmodernist movement gives us means to compare the output of the model to expected results, a sort of theoretical hypothesis to test against. In Challenging Modernity: Dada between Modern and Postmodern, Mark Pegrum posits Dada as a particularly early postmodernist entity, standing directly opposed to power structures, parallel but not intersecting with modernism, which seeks instead to redesign said power structures. Indeed, in the First International Dada Fair (1920), Dadaists cement their opposition to the establishment with posters pronouncing “Art is Dead” and "Dada is the deliberate subversion of bourgeois values.” (Dachy, 2006)

Jean Arp, a central figure in Dada, furthers these anti-establishment ideals with anti-war sentiment:

> “In Zurich, we had no interest in the abattoirs of the World War, and devoted ourselves to fine art. While the thunder of artillery rumbled away in the distance, we were putting together collages, reciting, writing verse, and singing with all our hearts. We were looking for an elementary type of art that we thought would save mankind from the raging madness of those times. We aspired to a new order that could reestablish the balance between heaven and hell.”

Dada is deeply intertwined with politics, with (some argue unwanted) ties to the Kommunistische Partei Deutshlands (Kane, 1982), Huelsenberg’s assertions that “Dada is German Bolshevism” (Motherwell, 1951), a few members labeled as anarchists (often overlapping with communists), and a general distrust, and satire, of authority. At one point, Andre Breton argues the Dadaists will declare themselves in favor of any revolution, so long as it is in opposition to conservatism. Dada earns infamy among the ranks of authority figures through a variety of art pieces and pranks: depicting a police officer as a pig in the First International Dada Fair; a founding of a ‘Dada Republic’ where soldiers are summoned in reaction to a non-existent revolution; photocollage satires of major political figures...the list goes on. (Dachy, 2006) In these acts of dissidence, Dada extends beyond art movement into the space of direct action and political protest, providing a wellspring of inspiration for arts-activism to come. We should expect Wikipedia’s link structure to reflect this. Conversely, a link structure that paints Dada as a friend to authoritarian figures would be worthy of skepticism, helping establish theoretical underpinnings for validation (or rejection) of our analysis.

Dada’s final strength as subject matter is its own documentation, helping dissolve some potential for misrepresentation found with other topics more reliant on secondary sources. From it’s founding in 1915, Dada quickly moves to form cells outside of Zurich, first in Europe and then to Japan, through Murayama, and the US, where Duchamp makes his home in New York. In this international arena, Dadaist thoughts and ideals are spread via magazines and art rags of the time–first and foremost, Hugo Ball and Tristan Tzara's Dada magazine, but just as importantly, Merz, Schwitter’s periodical; 391, from Picabia in Barcelona; Mavo, from Murayama in Japan, and (albeit tangentially) De Stijl, which, while not directly related to Dada, is a close enough cousin through it’s author “Bonset’s” (Theo Van Doesenberg’s Dadaist Pseudonym) ongoing collaborations with members of the movement. (Dachy, 2006) Additionally, broad art magazines of the time, the art itself and art gallery records provide strong primary sources for its study and representation on Wikipedia.

In attempting to quantify influence, it is often difficult to disentangle Dada from its particular moment in history, but by relying on link analysis, we have a start: authors have diligently and specifically linked their page to or from Dada, allowing us to track the chain of concepts as they evolve rather than rely upon chronological proximity. Ideally, network analyses helps define causal relationships by isolating the path from one concept to the next. In reality, these paths are multifaceted, and Dada is itself a culmination of history before it. On a theoretical basis, it may be difficult to remove Dada from it's own influences: a reaction against war, nationalism, and destruction; inspiration from the great thinkers of its epoch, such as Nietzshe, Freud and Marx, (Pegrum, 2000), and of course the cross pollination of other prominent art movements of the moment, like Cubism, Futurism, Expressionism, and especially Surrealism. The network …. (to be cont'd)


### “Data collection: Methodology”

Data is collected for analysis using a crawler that traverses links. In our analyses, two types of link are included: links mapping from an article to the article in question, and links mapping to an article in from the article in question. (FIG 1) Wikipedia’s structure conveniently gives us this option by providing a “What Links Here Page” for most articles. Links mapping from are collected from within the article itself by parsing the article’s HTML and collecting anchor tag HREF values (FIG 2) that link specifically to other articles within Wikipedia.

These links are limited to the body text of the article from which they originate; tables appearing underneath articles are not included because they are categorical in nature. Also excluded are categorical pages, as any analysis using link structure to weight relevance would be dismantled by categories too broad to ascribe meaning (such as ‘Art’). Links to pages that are not articles themselves are excluded as much as possible: ‘Talk’, ‘User’, and ‘Portal’ pages are not included as they are more related to the structure of Wikipedia’s community than the topics themselves.

Some pages are included in the link structure but are ‘dead ends’ in the network–that is, pages may link to them but no pages will link from them. Unfortunately, due to limitations in scope, non-English pages are included in this category. Also included are image pages, which do not contain the same sort of outward-bound links collected from the body text of articles, ‘Book’ and ‘Wikisource’ pages, for the same reason, and ‘Wikiquote’ and ‘Draft’ pages because they similarly lack a homogenous page structure to collect data from.

In essence, pages and links are curated to keep the data congruent and the model parsimonious. The guiding principles for inclusion were that links were human crafted (or in the case of ‘What Links Here’ pages, a collection of human crafted links) and part of an article, rather than discussion, or machine generated.

In addition to the links themselves, categorical information associated with Wikipedia’s ‘Wikidata’ objects is also collected. Wikidata objects feature relatively unstructured categorical details per article, adhering to a key:value pair schema, where values are often arrays. As such, our collection reflects the unstructured nature of this categorical data, but allows additional analysis and classification, as well as contextualization and filtering in the final visualization.

In actual collection, we began with links directly mapping to or from the Dada Wikipedia article. Then, a coefficient to measure the strength of the relationship based on the number of shared links within that article’s ecosystem was developed. Inspired by Google’s PageRank algorithm, … (notes on coefficient, establishing cutoff, size of dataset, initial findings) … (to be cont'd)


### “Data collection: Strength and Bias”

Wikipedia does present some issues beyond the scope of our data collection. Specifically of note is the quality of its articles. As noted by Mesgari et al (2014), this quality comes under review in several different forms: comprehensiveness (within articles, and across Wikipedia as a whole), its factual accuracy, breadth and presentation. While presentation is not of particular note for our analysis, (as our data collection is done by automated programs and not humans) breadth, factual accuracy, and comprehensiveness are.

In breadth, Wikipedia reports that it is 60 times larger than any other english-language encyclopedia, with well over 5 million articles as of this writing (Wikipedia, 2017). Although the size of an encyclopedia alone is not normally cause célèbre amongst researchers, because each article increases our sample size, it increases the power of any statistical analyses applied to said data, and thereby our ability to say with certainty how ‘influenced’ any particular entity is by Dada. Wikipedia's coverage is uneven, but it’s propensity for non-traditional, up-to-date crowdsourced encyclopedic information helps in this respect, (Mesgari et al 2014) in that it more readily allows us to draw connections between Dada and contemporary cultural items.

Researchers have noted an unevenness in coverage on Wikipedia. In 2008, Halavais and Lackoff compared the topical distribution of books in print (from Bowkers Books in Print) vs. topical distribution of Wikipedia articles, and found differences in representation they attribute to the Wikipedia’s ‘geek culture’(footnote 1): for articles on science and general history, Wikipedia is more voluminous, whereas for medicine, less so. In the center, with similar distributions between books in print and Wikipedia articles, was ‘Fine Art’, a category presumably including Dada, implying that Dada falls within a relatively ‘safe zone’ of neither under nor overrepresentation.(footnote 2)

Further review on gender inclusion by Reagle and Rue (2011) finds that women are underrepresented in biographies, although article length does not vary significantly by gender, thereby increasing the likelihood that while women who are present will enjoy relatively comprehensive coverage, it’s likely that some of the important female contributors to Dada are left out. (expand upon this if possible)

(to be cont'd)

The phrase ‘geek culture’ is used first by James Wales, the founder of Wikipedia, in his Wikimania 2006 keynote address: "We are stronger in science than in many other areas. we come from geek culture, we come from the free software movement, we have a lot of technologists involved. that’s where our major strengths are. We know we have systemic biases.” (Halavais and Lackoff 2008)
Mesgari et al (2014) argues that over representation should not really be considered an issue for encyclopedias, as previous encyclopedias were edited for brevity so they could fit within the confines of print. While this is certainly true, over representation of a topic in our analysis poses an increased possibility of spurious connections.

"Size comparisons." Wikipedia. March 21, 2017. Accessed March 22, 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Size_comparisons.
